---
layout: post
title: 1st week of ZJ
create_date: 2019-09-08 22:00 +0800
update_date: 
categories: ZJ
---

This article serves the purpose of both documenting my first week’s voluntary teaching experience and why I did it.

One day one of my Cornell friends came to HK to see me, the night before I just couldn’t sleep. A small part is because of his coming, but mostly the insomnia is due to my unhappiness: I did not think my previous day’s work was fun, and I couldn’t sleep while I don’t think I did anything during the day. So I just kept watching films and YouTube to waste time till about 6am in the morning. I reflected on myself: what is the most interesting thing I want to do now? After a short while, I exclaimed to myself: voluntary teaching! It’s always been my dream since high school, and I almost forgot about it after a year’s daily scrums! Then, I instantly applied for the opportunity for voluntary teaching in fall 2019, and went to sleep for a while, before he came to me and we went out to hang out.

I feel tired explaining this to so many people asking me about the purpose of coming to voluntarily teach, so here they are:

1. I want to experience a life different from school or work, to rest and reflect on my future life
2. I lack patience when explaining stuff to people, and I want to overcome that shortcoming
3. I want to hone my teaching skills which will come handy in the future when I deal with kids
4. I want to instill in the kids the thought to grow stronger, go out and explore the world. The second sentence from *The Great Gatsby* says, *“Whenever you feel like criticizing anyone, he told me, just remember that all the people in this world haven't had the advantages that you've had.’”* There are children starving and suffering from diseases, or growing up without parents’ care, etc. Just because we do not meet them everyday does not mean we can take advantage of our lucky vantage point and not help them. (I put this reason lastly not because it’s most important, but least. After all, I AM a mostly selfish man and don’t want to pretend to be nice/good/elegant/esteemed AT ALL!)

And here I am in Guizhou, a beautiful province famous for Maotai (a famous Chinese white wine), FAST (largest radio telescope on earth), and Huangguoshu (or literally translated to: yellow fruit tree) Waterfall, but insular due to its mountains. The government has increasingly invested in such poor areas in recent years, and the schools here have beautiful buildings and playgrounds, but they lack good teachers due to poor transportation, and that’s where I come in.

The 1st week I was so disoriented. 

kind late now, will continue next time~
